Hello friends
In this video let us understand how to implement hash
Table with linear probing in the previous videos we learned
about collision and how we can solve it using linear
probing
So in linear probing if any collision
occur we will search the next available index by
checking indices one by one Linearly so the
algorithms to insert or delete or search and element in
linear probing will be this
First we have to initialise the hash table with minus
one and then find the key using data mod size
equation
And if hash table of Key is available that is
if it is equal to minus one we can insert
the data else we can say the collision occured
So we have two increment the
Key value by one continuously using the equation key
equal to key plus one mod size until we find
the next available index
And if any index is available we can insert the
data there and in the process if we again
reached the starting point we can understand that we have
traversed the whole hash table and we couldn't find the
available index so we can display the message
Hash table is full so let us get into the implementation
So first let us implement the hash table using an
array
So we are going to create a hash table of
size five
So first define size equal to five and declare and
integer array arr of size five
So an array of size five is created now
and this will be our hash table
Now we have to initialise the hash table with the
value minus one
We can do it in the constructor
It uses the four loop to set every value in
the hash table as minus one so the hash table
is created and initialised with minus one
now
Now we have to insert element here and for that
we have the insert function which will insert values into
the hash table using linear probing and we will
pass the value to be inserted into this function
So first let us insert into this hash table so
value is equal to 10
Now and we need to find the key first
That is where should be inserted this element ten so
we have key equal to value mod size
That is 10 mod five which is equal to zero
So we have to insert 10 at index zero
But before we can insert we have to check
If it is free
If it is free we can insert it there
Otherwise we have to check for the next available index
and we can check that by checking the value at
that index
If it is equal to minus one then it is
free otherwise
It is not so copy key to have variable index so
key equal to index equal to zero Now
Now check if arr of index is not equal to
minus one but it is that is it is available
for insertion
So while fails and we can insert at that
index itself So we have arr of index is
equal to value
So insertion of ten is now completed successfully so returned
One now let us try to insert another element four and
we need to find the key first and we have
key equal to value mod size that is four mod
five which is equal to four
so copy key to have variable index
But again before we can insert we have to check
If it is free and we have arr of four
equal to minus one
So the while condition fails here and we can insert
value at arr of Index that is arr of four
and it is completed
So returned one
now let us insert another element to and to find key
we have key equal to value most size
That is two mod five which is equal to two
So copy Key to index and check if index is
free and we have arr of two equal to minus
one
So this while condition fails here so we can come
out and we can insert element two at index two
and that is done
So return one
And now let us insert the element 15 into this
hash table
And to find key we have the equation
key equal to Value mod size that is 15 mod five which
is equal to zero
So first copy
key to index and check
If indexes free for insertion and we have arr of
zero is equal to 10 and not equal to minus
one that is it is not available for insertion or
we can say a collision occurred here so we have
to find the next available index
So here the while condition becomes true and inside we
will find a new key by using the equation index
equal to index plus one mod size that is zero
plus one mod five
That is one mod five which is equal to one
So we got the new index and check
If the new index equal to key again that is
key was our actual index
That is the actual location that this element was supposed
to be inserted
And if collision occurs and we are finding new index
and we reach key again it means the hash table
has become full so let us check if index equal to key
But it is not so if fails and this iteration
of while loop is completed now in the next iteration
let us check the condition again and we have arr
of index that is arr  of one equal to minus
one
So the condition fails here and the control comes out
of the while
Look that is index one is free for insertion so
we can insert 15 to index one and then one
will be returned
As the insertion is successful now let us is insert another element
five to this hash table
First let us find the key that is equal to
value mod size which is five mod five which is
equal to zero first copy Key to index and check
if index is free and we have arr  of zero
equal to 10 and not equal to minus one so collision
occured
So while condition becomes true here and let us find
the new key by the equation index equal to index
plus one mod size that is zero plus one mod
five
That is one mod five which is equal to one
So we got a new index and let us check
if the new index equal to Key again
But it is not so if fails here
And this iteration of while loop is now completed
Now in the next iteration let us checked the while condition
again and we have arr  of one equal to 15
and not minus one
So the condition is okay
So again collision occurred
So find a new index that is one plus one
mod size that is two mod five which is equal
to two
So we got in new index and let us check
If the new index equal to key again
But it is not so if fails and this iteration
of While loop is also completed Now in the next
iteration let us check the while condition
We have a r r of two equal to two
and not equal to minus one
So again collision occurred and the while condition is satisfied
here
So start the next iteration and find the new index
and we will get two plus one mod size
That is three mod five which is equal to three
So we got a new index and check if the
new index equal to key again
But it is not so if fails
And this iteration of while loop is also completed now
So check the condition again for next iteration and we
have arr  of three equal to minus one
So this while condition fails here
So control comes out of the while loop and we
can insert five to index three
So the insertion is successful
So returned one
Now let us insert another element 20
Let us find key
First we have key equal to value mod size that
is five mod five which is equal to zero now
Copy key to index and check if intex is free
and we have arr  of zero equal to 10 and
not equal to minus one
So collision occurred
So while condition is satisfied and we have to find
the new key and we have index equal to index
plus one mod size that is zero plus one mod
five
That is one mod five equal to one
So we got the new index and let us check
If new index equal to key again but it is not
so if fails and this iteration of while loop is
completed now check the condition again for next iteration and
we have arr  of one equal to 15 and not
equal to minus one
So again collision occurred and the while condition is satisfied
So starting next iteration and find the new index and
we will get one plus one mod five that is
two mod five equal to two
So we got the new index Now let us check
if it is equal to key again
But it is not so if fails and this iteration
is also completed now in the next iteration checked the
while condition again and we have arr  of two equal
to two
So again collision occurred
And while condition is satisfied here so starting next iteration
and find the new index and we will get two
plus one mod five that is three mod five which
is equal to three
So we got the new index three and check if
it is equal to Key again
But it is not so if fails and this iteration
of while loop is also completed
Now check the while condition again for the next iteration
and we have arr  of three equal to five and
not equal to minus one
So again collision occurred
And while condition is satisfied here so starting next iteration
and find the new index and we have three plus
one mod five that is four mod five which is
equal to four
So we got the new index four and let us check
if it is equal to key
But it is not so if fails and this iteration
of while loop is also completed
So check the while condition again for the next iteration
and we have arr of four equal to four and
not equal to minus one
So again while condition is satisfied since a collision occurred
So starting next iteration and find the new index that
is four plus one mod
Five that is five mod five that is equal to
zero
So we got the new index zero and let us
check if it is equal to key again
And it is which means we have searched the whole
hash table for a free index and we did not
find it
Which means the hash table has become full Now so
print
The hash table is full and returned zero
So that is how we can insert elements to a
hash table with linear probing.